federalist 57
the alleged tendency of the new plan to
elevate the few at the expense of the
many considered in connection with
representation
from the new york packet tuesday
february 19 1788
hamilton or madison
to the people of the state of new york
the third charge against the house of
representatives is that it will be taken
from that class of citizens which will
have least sympathy with the mass of the
people and be most likely to aim at an
ambitious sacrifice of the many to the
aggrandizement of the few
of all the objections which have been
framed against the federal constitution
this is perhaps the most extraordinary
whilst the objection itself is leveled
against a pretended oligarchy the
principle of its strikes at the very
root of republican government
the aim of every political constitution
is or ought to be first to obtain for
rulers men who possess most wisdom to
discern and most virtue to pursue the
common good of the society and in the
next place to take the most effectual
precautions for keeping them virtuous
whilst they continue to hold their
public trust
the elective mode of obtaining rulers is
the characteristic policy of republican
government
the means relied on in this form of
government for preventing their
degeneracy are numerous and various the
most effectual one is such a limitation
of the term of appointments as we'll
maintain a proper responsibility to the
people
let me now ask what circumstance there
is in the constitution of the house of
representatives that violates the
principles of republican government or
favors the elevation of the few on the
ruins of the many
let me ask whether every circumstance is
not on the contrary strictly conformable
to these principles and scrupulously
impartial to the rights and pretensions
of every class and description of
citizens
who are to be the electors of the
federal representatives not the rich
more than the poor not the learned more
than the ignorant not the haughty heirs
of distinguished names more than the
humble sons of obscurity and
unpropitious fortune
the electors are to be the great body of
the people of the united states they are
to be the same who exercise the right in
every state of electing the
corresponding branch of the legislature
of the state
who are to be the objects of popular
choice every citizen whose merit may
recommend him to the esteem and
confidence of his country
no qualification of wealth of birth of
religious faith or of civil proficient
is permitted to fetter the judgment or
disappoint the inclination of the people
if we consider the situation of the men
on whom the free suffrages of their
fellow citizens may confer the
representative trust we shall find it
involving every security which can be
devised or desired for their fidelity to
their constituents
in the first place as they will have
been distinguished by the preference of
their fellow citizens we are to presume
that in general they will be somewhat
distinguished also by those qualities
which entitle them to it and which
promise a sincere and scrupulous regard
to the nature of their engagements
in the second place they will enter into
the public service under circumstances
which cannot fail to produce a temporary
affection at least to their constituents
there is in every breast a sensibility
to marks of honor of favor of esteem and
of confidence which apart from all
considerations of interest is some
pledge for grateful and benevolent
returns
ingratitude is a common topic of
declaration against human nature and it
must be confessed that instances of it
are but too frequent and flagrant both
in public and private life but the
universal and extreme indignation which
it inspires is itself a proof of the
energy and prevalence of the contrary
sentiment in the third place those ties
which bind the representative to his
constituents are strengthened by motives
of a more selfish nature
his pride and vanity attach him to a
form of government which favors his
pretensions and gives him a share in its
honors and distinctions
whatever hopes or projects might be
entertained by a few aspiring characters
it must generally happen that a great
proportion of the men deriving their
advancement from their influence with
the people would have more to hope from
a preservation of the favor than from
innovations in the government subversive
of the authority of the people all these
securities however would be found very
insufficient without the restraint of
frequent elections
hence in the fourth place the house of
representatives is so constituted as to
support in the members and habitual
recollection of their dependence on the
people
before the sentiments impressed on their
minds by the mode of their elevation can
be effaced by the exercise of power they
will be compelled to anticipate the
moment when their power is to cease when
their exercise of it is to be reviewed
and when they must descend to the level
from which they were raised
there forever to remain unless a
faithful discharge of their trust shall
have established their title to a
renewal of it
i will add as a fifth circumstance in
the situation of the house of
representatives restraining them from
oppressive measures that they can make
no law which will not have its full
operation on themselves and their
friends as well as on the great mass of
the society
this has always been deemed one of the
strongest bonds by which human policy
can connect the rulers and the people
together
it creates between them that communion
of interests and sympathy of sentiments
of which few governments have furnished
examples but without which every
government degenerates into tyranny if
it be asked what is to restrain the
house of representatives from making
legal discriminations in favor of
themselves and a particular class of
society
i answer the genius of the whole system
the nature of just and constitutional
laws and above all the vigilant and
manly spirit which actuates the people
of america a spirit which nourishes
freedom and in return is nourished by it
if this spirit shall ever be so far
debased as to tolerate a law not
obligatory on the legislature as well as
on the people the people will be
prepared to tolerate anything but
liberty
such will be the relation between the
house of representatives and their
constituents duty gratitude interest
ambition itself are the cords by which
they will be bound to fidelity and
sympathy with the great mass of the
people
it is possible that these may all be
insufficient to control the caprice and
wickedness of man but are they not all
that government will admit and that
human prudence can devise
are they not the genuine and the
characteristic means by which republican
government provides for the liberty and
happiness of the people
are they not the identical means on
which every state government in the
union relies for the attainment of these
important ends
what then are we to understand by the
objection which this paper has combated
what are we to say to the men who
profess the most flaming zeal for
republican government yet boldly impeach
the fundamental principle of it
who pretend to be champions for the
right and the capacity of the people to
choose their own rulers yet maintained
that they will prefer those only who
will immediately and infallibly betray
the trust committed to them
were the objection to be read by one who
had not seen the mode prescribed by the
constitution for the choice of
representatives he could suppose nothing
less than that some unreasonable
qualification of property was annexed to
the right of suffrage or that the right
of eligibility was limited to persons of
particular families or fortunes or at
least that the mode prescribed by the
state constitutions was in some respect
or other very grossly departed from
we have seen how far such a supposition
would air as to the two first points nor
would it in fact be less erroneous as to
the last
the only difference discoverable between
the two cases is that each
representative of the united states will
be elected by five or six thousand
citizens whilst in the individual states
the election of a representative is left
to about as many hundreds
will it be pretended that this
difference is sufficient to justify an
attachment to the state governments and
an abhorrence to the federal government
if this be the point on which the
objection turns it deserves to be
examined
is it supported by reason
this cannot be said without maintaining
that five or six thousand citizens are
less capable of choosing a fit
representative or more liable to be
corrupted by an unfit one than five or
six hundred
reason on the contrary assures us that
as in so great a number a fit
representative would be most likely to
be found so the choice would be less
likely to be diverted from him by the
intrigues of the ambitious or the bribes
of the rich
is the consequence from this doctrine
admissible
if we say that five or six hundred
citizens are as many as can jointly
exercise their right of suffrage must we
not deprive the people of the immediate
choice of their public servants in every
instance where the administration of the
government does not require as many of
them as will amount to one for that
number of citizens is the doctrine
warranted by facts
it was shown in the last paper that the
real representation in the british house
of commons very little exceeds the
proportion of one for every thirty
thousand inhabitants besides a variety
of powerful causes not existing here and
which favor in that country the
pretensions of rank and wealth no person
is eligible as a representative of a
county unless he possess real estate of
the clear value of 600 pounds sterling
per year nor of a city or borough unless
he possess a leica state of half that
annual value
to this qualification on the part of the
county representatives is added another
on the part of the county electors which
restrains the right of suffrage to
persons having a freehold estate of the
annual value of more than 20 pounds
sterling according to the present rate
of money
notwithstanding these unfavorable
circumstances and notwithstanding some
very unequal laws in the british code it
cannot be said that the representatives
of the nation have elevated the few on
the ruins of the many
but we need not resort to foreign
experience on this subject our own is
explicit and decisive
the districts in new hampshire in which
the senators are chosen immediately by
the people are nearly as large as will
be necessary for her representatives in
the congress
those of massachusetts are larger than
will be necessary for that purpose and
those of new york still more so
in the last state the members of
assembly for the cities and counties of
new york and albany are elected by very
nearly as many voters as will be
entitled to a representative in the
congress calculating on the number of 65
representatives only
it makes no difference that in these
senatorial districts and counties a
number of representatives are voted for
by each elector at the same time
if the same electors at the same time
are capable of choosing four or five
representatives they cannot be incapable
of choosing one
pennsylvania is an additional example
some of her counties which elect her
state representatives are almost as
large as her districts will be by which
her federal representatives will be
elected the city of philadelphia is
supposed to contain between 50 and 60
000 souls
it will therefore form nearly two
districts for the choice of federal
representatives
it forms however but one county in which
every elector votes for each of its
representatives in the state legislature
and what may appear to be still more
directly to our purpose the whole city
actually elects a single member for the
executive council
this is the case in all the other
counties of the state
are not these facts the most
satisfactory proofs on the fallacy which
has been employed against the branch of
the federal government under
consideration
has it appeared on trial that the
senators of new hampshire massachusetts
and new york or the executive council of
pennsylvania or the members of the
assembly in the two last states have
betrayed any peculiar disposition to
sacrifice the many to the few or are in
any respect less worthy of their places
than the representatives and magistrates
appointed in other states by very small
divisions of the people but there are
cases of stronger complexion than any
which i have yet quoted
one branch of the legislature of
connecticut is so constituted that each
member of it is elected by the whole
state
so is the governor of that state of
massachusetts and of this state and the
president of new hampshire
i leave every man to decide whether the
result of any one of these experiments
can be said to countenance a suspicion
that a diffusive mode of choosing
representatives of the people tends to
elevate traitors and to undermine the
public liberty
publius